# nba-basketball
Hello everyone, good morning

My name is Justin and I will be presenting the classification of NBA players using Data Science methods for the 2018-2019 NBA season.

I would like to thank my advisor Dr. Florin Catrina for all your help and Dr. Mikhail Ostrovskii for the funding of this project. So, let’s begin.

For those of you who don’t know about basketball, let me explain how this works. There are two teams of 15 players each but only 5 players from each team can be present in the court. Those 5 players are classified by their respective positions: Point Guard, Shooting Guard, Small Forward, Power Forward, and Center. Now, the idea is that there are certain NBA players that play more than one position, so I have decided to create eight new classifications of my own, which are present in this slide. What I’m going to do is that I’m going to cluster the players that belong in each classification using their stats and later on, I’m going to explain the significance of these classifications, as well as each of the eight categories. 

We begin with the introduction of my data. I obtained this data from basketball reference .com and there are two datasets called player_stats and advanced_stats. In the head of the first dataset, you can see all the columns that pertain to the statistics of each player. Since I’m trying to classify a player by stats, I adjust my dataset using the players who played at least 30 games and I eliminate columns that have nothing to do with a players stats, such as age, team, and games played. In the second dataset, we have advanced metrics with columns titled player efficiency rating, usage rate, and win shares. I’ll get more into that after we cluster our data.

From there, we preprocess our data. This means that we start to create a model by sample splitting our data into training and testing data. We use a library called caTools, which is similar to scikit-learn sample split from Python. So in order to sample split data, we pick a ratio, and for me, I chose .8, so we obtain a 80-20 training-testing data split, so 80% of my data goes to training and 20% of my data goes to testing. From here, we begin to utilize more of the training data because there are more observations to work with.

The next step in linear discrimination analysis. This is a technique that falls under dimensionality reduction and here’s how it works. We make a formula that bases the position of our players to the sum of all stats to each player using observations from our training dataset. The result is in the form of our head of the training_set where we have 10 columns, 1 column is position and then we obtain 9 columns of randomly generated numbers from the formula. Now, the reason this is dimensionality reduction is because the goal is to decrease the number of columns in our data in order to obtain the most accurate model and from what you can see, we brought the number of columns down from 30 to 25 to 10. From here, we transition to principal component analysis to further decrease more columns in our data and this is why.

We have a K-Means clustering code of our training_set and based on the image in the bottom right, we have eight circles of clusters just jumbled up together, so we can’t make anything specific about it. So what we do is we implement the use of principal component analysis to not only reduce more columns in our data, but also to separate our eight clusters. 

So, right here, we are using the libraries caret and e1071 which is again similar to Python’s scikit-learn, because they’re all used to make machine learning models. Based on the code, we center and scale our data to four columns, the players, two columns of randomly generated numbers, and the number where we place each player. Using this training_set, we obtain the following:

This is an example of a for loop where for every player in a cluster, we bind the players in that cluster along with their stats. In addition, we omit players that may appear more than once in the data. After, we use the library ggplot to form a scatter plot of the list of players that belong in a category of our choosing and in this case, I chose floor generals because it’s an example of how my other 7 for loops and scatter plots are made. Now, we have created the cluster and it’s time to understand the use of what these clusters entail.

The first set of images I have here are called PCA Biplots. They are images that separate two classifications using these red arrows. Now, the direction of these arrows entail the advantages one classification has over the other. So for example, in the top left, stationary bigs have an advantage in field goal percentage and two pointers over mobile bigs and mobile bigs have an advantage in field goals attempted and points. The reason for this is that stationary bigs are the tallest players in the team so all their shots are very close to the basket. Mobile bigs are also stationary bigs but they are capable of shooting the ball and for that, they are at risk of missing more shots. So now I think you understand how this works, but let me quickly explain the other six classifications. Role players are players from the bench so you don’t rely on them to do anything stat wise, but they’re still useful in a way. Combo players are individuals that can play two positions because their height and durability allows them to be used in different manners hence all arrows pointing to combo players on the top right. Floor generals are the quarterbacks of the NBA, meaning they facilitate plays for their team and make sure all their players are involved. Versatile forwards are offensive scoring machines that can shoot the ball and get close to the basket because their tall height allows them too, so it would make sense all arrows pointing to them on the bottom left because floor generals usually don’t score that much unless they have to. Designated scorers are similar to versatile forwards but they’re much smaller in height but you mainly depend on them to score the ball. Three point specialists are players that only shoot three pointers, so since their role is limited, it would make sense that all arrows on the bottom right point to designated scorers. If that wasn’t enough, here’s a further analysis using advanced metrics.

The first graph is win shares. This means which classification determines the win loss percentage of a team. From what you can see, the floor generals and stationary bigs take over and here’s the reason why. If floor generals do their job and play well, usually the same goes for the team. And then like I mentioned before, stationary bigs are close to the basket so the closer you are, the higher probability you have of making the basket leading your team to more wins than losses.

The second graph is player efficiency rating. This means that all statistics of a players are combined into one number and that makes the statistical performance of that player. In this case, which classification has the highest statistical performance to offer? From what you can see, it’s quite intriguing that floor generals and stationary bigs take over again, but it makes sense because the statistical performance of a classification does affect the win loss percentage of a team so there’s a direct relationship. On the other hand, some classification went a little up such as mobile bigs, combo players, and designated scorers, and probably this may be because certain players from those clusters stand out individually, but I’ll get into that after.

The third graph is usage rate. This means an estimate of the percentage of team plays used by a player when present, so in other words, how many plays in a 48 minute game can these classifications contribute? So, the graph visually looks different because of the following reasons. Stationary and mobile bigs are not long lasting in the court because they’re the tallest players and the taller you get, the harder it is to move consistently in a 48 minute game. Versatile forwards and three point specialists usually are one sided because they mainly receive plays from others that they can easily finish, but they don’t return the favor. So it’s no surprise that the four classifications left entail players with a decent height that can consistently move up and down the court offensively and defensively and therefore they have more opportunities to create team plays.

Now, I thought it would be fun to create a top 10 players list for each classification based on total points to see what you would think. Now, if you’re an avid basketball fan and you disagree with the list, let me remind you that this is the 2018-2019 NBA Season. The reason I can’t analyze the 2019-2020 season is because the rest of the season has been canceled due to coronavirus so there is not enough data necessary to make a full analysis. 

To summarize, I would like to say that the whole point of this presentation is implement a process that was necessary to cluster players using all these methods and that it is possible to make the most accurate model by reducing the number of columns in your data.

Finally, I have my sources that I used for my presentation as well as a quote from my inspiration, the late Kobe Bryant, RIP, the most important thing is to try and inspire people so that they can be great at whatever they want to do. Thank you very much
